Cause morbidity impacts (#1153)
ihmeuw/vivarium_research: docs/source/model_design/vivarium_model_components/causes/index.rst

Residual YLDs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For less common diseases and their sequelae, GBD may not currently estimate disease prevalence and YLDs, and have thus been included in residual categories. For these residual categories, GBD estimates YLDs by multiplying the residual YLL estimates by the ratio of YLDs to YLLs from the estimates of Level 3 causes in the same disease category that were explicitly modelled. This scaling is done for each country-sex-year. 

Incidence- vs. Prevalence-Based YLDs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

*Incidence-based YLDs* provide a measure of the disease burden experienced by an individual over the course of their lifetime. An incident case of an incurable disease would accrue as many incidence-based YLDs as years left of that person's life expectancy.

> *Prevalence-based YLDs*, on the other hand, are what we tend to use in Vivarium models. Prevalence-based YLDs reflect the burden of disease in the year of incidence. An incident case of an incurable disease would only accrue YLDs from the first year in which the disease is experienced. 

Author: I just tried to make this more clear. Please let me know if you think it could be worded better!

Residual YLDs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For less common diseases and their sequelae, GBD may not currently estimate disease prevalence and YLDs, and have thus been included in residual categories. For these residual categories, GBD estimates YLDs by multiplying the residual YLL estimates by the ratio of YLDs to YLLs from the estimates of Level 3 causes in the same disease category that were explicitly modelled. This scaling is done for each country-sex-year. 

Incidence- vs. Prevalence-Based YLDs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> *Incidence-based YLDs* provide a measure of the disease burden experienced by an individual over the course of their lifetime. An incident case of an incurable disease would accrue as many incidence-based YLDs as years left of that person's life expectancy. 

Reviewer: Oh, yeah I see that you use an example of incurable diseases below in the prevalence-based YLDs section. I think it's good to keep up here too then! So feel free to ignore my comment :)

> *Incidence-based YLDs* provide a measure of the disease burden experienced by an individual over the course of their lifetime, or however many years we observe the individual. If our observation duration was long enough, an incident case of an incurable disease would accrue as many incidence-based YLDs as years left of that person's life expectancy. However, for a more relevant example to the work on our team, imagine we are evaluating DALYs among children 0-5 years old, and there was a baby with a birth defect. We would only count YLDs accumulated in the first 5 years of their life, not the YLDs that they will accumulate over the entire course of their life.

Author: Okay, yes, thank you for pointing that out. I just edited this section again to amend that confusion, hopefully it seems more accurate now.

> *Prevalence-based YLDs*, on the other hand, are what we tend to use in Vivarium models. Prevalence-based YLDs reflect the burden of disease in the year(s) of incidence in which we observe the individual. An incident case of an incurable disease would only accrue YLDs for the duration of observation. For another example of how prevalence-based YLDs work, imagine we are evaluating DALYs among children 0-5 years old, and there was a baby with a birth defect. We would only count YLDs accumulated in the first 5 years of their life, not the YLDs that they will accumulate over the entire course of their life.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*Prevalence-based YLDs*, on the other hand, are what we tend to use in Vivarium models. Prevalence-based YLDs reflect the burden of disease in the year(s) in which we observe the individual. An incident case of an incurable disease would only accrue YLDs for the duration of observation. For another example of how prevalence-based YLDs work, imagine we are evaluating DALYs among children 0-5 years old, and there was a baby with a birth defect. We would only count YLDs accumulated in the first 5 years of their life, not the YLDs that they will accumulate over the entire course of their life.
```

nitpick: I don't think "of incidence" is accurate because that would only be the first year someone has a chronic condition

     - YLD and YLL measurements are measured using different methods; For diseases with a short duration, YLDs may be underestimated.

YLDs in Vivarium 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> DWs and YLDs in Vivarium apply to the duration of the condition. Remember, YLDs are a product of the DW associated with the condition and the time between onset and survival. To illustrate an example, let's say an individual contracted the flu with a disability weight of 0.05 and recovered after 1 week. To calculate the YLDs here, we would multiply 0.05 by 1/52 (0.019).

Reviewer: It also might be nice to incorporate some information about vivarium timesteps here. How it would work in vivarium is that if we had timesteps of one week, then the simulant would accumulate YLDs equal to DW * time_step for each timestep that they are infected, where timestep is defined in a fraction of one year. Therefore, choosing an appropriate timestep duration is important for getting YLDs correct! If we had month long timesteps, then a case of the flu (which should really only be 1 week) would accrue YLDs for the flu over an entire month.

> DWs and YLDs in Vivarium apply to the duration of the condition. Remember, YLDs are a product of the DW associated with the condition and the time between onset and survival. To illustrate an example, let's say an individual contracted the flu with a disability weight of 0.05 and recovered after 1 week. To calculate the YLDs here, we would multiply 0.05 by 1/52 (0.019).

Reviewer: ^ This implies that (YLDs_cause_1_each_timestep + YLDs_cause_2_each_timestep) > YLDs_overall_each_timestep

> DWs and YLDs in Vivarium apply to the duration of the condition. Remember, YLDs are a product of the DW associated with the condition and the time between onset and survival. To illustrate an example, let's say an individual contracted the flu with a disability weight of 0.05 and recovered after 1 week. To calculate the YLDs here, we would multiply 0.05 by 1/52 (0.019).

Reviewer 2: @alibow I wasn't able to totally get to the bottom of it, but I am reasonably confident from [the Vivarium code](https://github.com/ihmeuw/vivarium_public_health/blob/d8db587f56e5ffcba97fd6bb77fd2d2ff585218d/src/vivarium_public_health/metrics/disability.py#L175-L182) that you're correct about how Vivarium calculates cause-specific and overall YLDs.

> Another important note is that DWs and YLDs must always be less than 1, because '1' is essentially death. For this reason, if an individual experiences multiple conditions at once, the total amount of YLDs is calculated by multiplying the YLDs of each individual condition together. For instance, let's say an individual has lived with three health conditions, with respective YLDs of 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5. The total YLDs here would be (0.3) * (0.4) * (0.5). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another important note is that DWs must always be less than 1, because '1' is essentially death. For this reason, if an individual experiences multiple conditions at once, the total DW is calculated multiplicatively from the DWs of each individual condition together. For instance, let's say an individual has lived with three health conditions, with respective DWs of 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5. The total DW here would be (1 - 0.3) * (1 - 0.4) * (1 - 0.5). 
```

Reviewer 2: Oops Ali and I reviewed at the same time; her math is better but I think it's important not to say that YLDs must be less than 1 (unless I am not understanding what is meant by that).

> Another important note is that DWs and YLDs must always be less than 1, because '1' is essentially death. For this reason, if an individual experiences multiple conditions at once, the total amount of YLDs is calculated by multiplying the YLDs of each individual condition together. For instance, let's say an individual has lived with three health conditions, with respective YLDs of 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5. The total YLDs here would be (0.3) * (0.4) * (0.5). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another important note is that DWs and YLDs must always be less than 1, because '1' is essentially death. For this reason, if an individual experiences multiple conditions at once, the total amount of YLDs is calculated by multiplying the YLDs of each individual condition together. For instance, let's say an individual has lived with three health conditions, with respective YLDs of 0.3, 0.4, and 0.5. The total YLDs here would be :code:`1 - ((1-0.3) * (1-0.4) * (1-0.5))`. 
```
